Support arbitrary blob signing (#283)
notaryproject/notaryproject: specs/signature-specification.md

This document provides the following details for Notary Project signature:

- **[Signature Envelope](#signature-envelope)**: Describes the structure of the Notary Project signature.

> - **[OCI Signatures](#storage)**: Describes how signatures are stored and retrieved from an OCI registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[OCI Signatures](#storage)**: Describes how signatures for OCI artifacts are stored and retrieved from an OCI registry.
```

> - **[Detached Signatures](#storage)**: Describes how detached signatures of Blobs are stored on file system

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **[Detached Signatures](#storage)**: Describes how detached signatures of Blobs are stored on file system.
```

> - **[Detached Signatures](#storage)**: Describes how detached signatures of Blobs are stored on file system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Blob Signatures](#storage)**: Describes how detached signatures for signed Blobs are stored on file system.
```

> - **[Blob Signatures](#storage)**: Describes how signatures for signed Blobs are stored on file system.

Reviewer 3: hyperlink is broken.

A signature envelope is `e = {m, v, u, s}` where `s` is signature.

> This specification defines the set of signed and unsigned attributes that make up a valid Notary Project signature. This specification aims to be be agnostic of signature envelope format (e.g. COSE, JWS), details of encoding the envelope in a specific signature envelope format are covered in separate specs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This specification defines the set of signed and unsigned attributes that make up a valid Notary Project signature. This specification aims to be agnostic of signature envelope format (e.g. COSE, JWS), details of encoding the envelope in a specific signature envelope format are covered in separate specs.
```

The Notary Project signature payload is a JSON document with media type `application/vnd.cncf.notary.payload.v1+json` and has following properties.

- `targetArtifact` : Required property whose value is the descriptor of the target artifact manifest that is being signed.
- For OCI artifacts, this MUST be a valid [OCI descriptor][oci-descriptor].
  - Descriptor MUST contain `mediaType`, `digest`, and `size` fields.
  - Descriptor MAY contain `annotations` and if present it MUST follow the [annotation rules][annotation-rules].
  - Descriptor MAY contain `artifactType` field for the `config.mediaType` of OCI image manifests.
- For Blob artifacts, the descriptor MUST describe the blob that is being signed
  - Descriptor MUST contain `mediaType`, `digest`, and `size` fields.

>   - `digest` MUST be in the format of `<digest algorithm>:<digest value>`. Example: `sha256:2f3a23b6373afb134ddcd864be8e037e34a662d090d33ee849471ff73c873345`

Reviewer 3: nit: we need to capture the constraint on this digest (like accepted values and how they are derived) some here.

Author: done

>   - `digest` MUST be the hash of the blob using the hashing algorithm deduced from signing certificate's public key. See [Algorithm Selection](#algorithm-selection)

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering why the hash algorithm is determined by the signing key?

Author: My mad. I was confused with `Payload` hashing algorithm Vs Blob hashing algorithm. Payload hashing algorithm must be deduced from signing key, but Blob hashing algorithm has no such requirements (just like how we do not require registries to use a particular hashing algorithm for addressing their content)

Author: I correct the language.

The Notary Project signature payload is a JSON document with media type `application/vnd.cncf.notary.payload.v1+json` and has following properties.

- `targetArtifact` : Required property whose value is the descriptor of the target artifact manifest that is being signed.
- For OCI artifacts, this MUST be a valid [OCI descriptor][oci-descriptor].
  - Descriptor MUST contain `mediaType`, `digest`, and `size` fields.
  - Descriptor MAY contain `annotations` and if present it MUST follow the [annotation rules][annotation-rules].
  - Descriptor MAY contain `artifactType` field for the `config.mediaType` of OCI image manifests.

> - For Blob artifacts, the descriptor MUST describe the blob that is being signed

Reviewer 2: Can we say blob artifacts also uses OCI descriptors?

Author: What do you mean? Blob artifacts do not use OCI descriptors, right? They are slightly different.

Reviewer 2: Can you point out the differences?

Author: 1. mediaType doesn't necessarily have to be `application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json`
2. There is no `artifactType`

Reviewer 2: > 1. mediaType doesn't necessarily have to be `application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json`

[OCI descriptor](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/descriptor.md) does not restrict the media type. It can be literally anything as long as it complies with [RFC 6838](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6838).

> There is no `artifactType`

`artifactType` is an optional field in [OCI descriptor](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/blob/main/descriptor.md).

Reviewer 3: for OCI artifact registered algorithm is restricted to SHA256 and SHA512 but in blob we will also support SHA384.

Yes I agree we should use `OCI descriptor` with some tweaks.

Reviewer 2: `sha384` is not registered but not restricted.

  - Descriptor MUST contain `mediaType`, `digest`, and `size` fields.
  - `digest` MUST be in the format of `<digest algorithm>:<digest value>`. Example: `sha256:2f3a23b6373afb134ddcd864be8e037e34a662d090d33ee849471ff73c873345`

>   - SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512 are the only allowed digest algorithms.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512 are the only allowed digest algorithms.
```

>   - `digest algorithm` MUST be deduced from signing certificate's public key. See [Algorithm Selection](#algorithm-selection)

Reviewer 2: What's the security reasoning for this statement?

The hash algorithm for the signature is determined by the verification key because the hash algorithm presented in the signature header cannot be used since the header is not verified yet and thus is not trusted. However, the `digest` field in the payload is authenticated / verified, and thus can be trusted for further content validation.

Reviewer 2: Given the following payload,
```json
{
  "targetArtifact": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:9834876dcfb05cb167a5c24953eba58c4ac89b1adf57f28f2f9d09af107ee8f0",
    "size": 5146
  }
}
```
how do we know it is an artifact in a registry or a manifest blob in the local file system?

The answer is **we are not able to distinguish**.

Thinking out of the box. Why do we need to distinguish OCI signing and blob signing in the first place?

Reviewer 2: Cross referencing the discussion https://github.com/notaryproject/notation-go/pull/379#discussion_r1472254053 of the implementation of the spec being reviewed.

Reviewer 3: What's the security reasoning for this statement?
> We are advocating about using the same hashing algorithm throughout the signing operation. In blob singing case it would be 1) during content digest calculation to generate descriptor 2) during the actual signature generation process, the Signer uses the signing algorithm to hash the payload. Having a consistent hashing algo will not only improve user experience as they wont need to worry about passing additional attribute (or introducing another defualt) but will also keep it consistent with container image signing spec. Also, this will also help with deprecation of algorithm, we will just stop supporting signing and verification of particular key size.

how do we know it is an artifact in a registry or a manifest blob in the local file system?
> We can distinguish based on the customer's intent. With Notation, we can ascertain this from the CLI command and parameters, while with notation-go, it would be determined by the function parameters. However, just examining the signature payload would not provide this information.

Thinking out of the box. Why do we need to distinguish OCI signing and blob signing in the first place?
> completely agree that we should keep experience consistent and that's why we are proposing the same hashing algorithm throughout the signing operation

@shizhMSFT we would like to close this spec by end of week  as your team will be out of the office thereafter. Please inform us of any ways we can expedite the process.

Author: Agree with Pritesh.

IMO, reusing signature algorithm selection strategy for blobs has some benefits

1. Users can not accidentally shoot themselves in the foot by selecting a weaker algorithm than the one used by signatures
2. Deprecation of weaker algorithms becomes more straightforward.
3. Minor benefit but consistency helps folks working on specs/implementation to easily grok notation's hashing algorithm selection process

Reviewer 2: > We are advocating about using the same hashing algorithm throughout the signing operation

In that case, we are losing [crypto agility](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_agility) for blob signing while we do have that for so called "OCI signing".

> We can distinguish based on the customer's intent.

This will lead to security concerns. If the term "the customers" means "the signers", the intent MUST be signed. If the term "the customers" means "the verifiers", how do you make sure that the verifiers verify the intent of the signer?

For instance, Alice signs a manifest blob and generates a signature. After Alice publishes the signature, Eve downloads the manifest blob and the signature. Then Eve pushes the manifest blob to a registry along with the signature and a referrer manifest according to the signature. When Bob sees the manifest in the registry pushed by Eve, Bob verifies the manifest against the signature using the flow of so called "OCI verification" where it SHOULD be verified using the flow of blob signing originated by Alice.

Similarly, Alice can use an RSA-4096 key to sign an OCI manifest in a registry where the digest is generated by the registry like `sha256:xxxx`. After signing, Alice can pull down the manifest blob and the signature blob and declare that the signature is generated using blob signing from the signature blob although it is not possible as per this spec since the spec restricts RSA-4096 MUST be paired with `sha512:xxx`.

Reviewer 2: > Users can not accidentally shoot themselves in the foot by selecting a weaker algorithm than the one used by signatures

It is not a concern if they are using `notation`. For `notation-go` users, we can provide a utility function to generate a "good" descriptor according to their signing keys.

> Deprecation of weaker algorithms becomes more straightforward.

If `sha256` is chosen because of the key length of the RSA / EC key, what if we need to replace `sha256` (a.k.a `sha2-256`) with `sha3-256` later some day?

Reviewer 2: Ideally, I am proposing the following relation
```mermaid
graph LR
  core["Sign descriptor"]
  oci["Sign artifacts / images in registries"] --> core
  blob["Sign blob"] --> core
```

In this direction, what we are signing is indeed the "OCI descriptor". Artifacts in registries and blobs are the same concept but stored in different storages.

Reviewer 2: Besides the direction mentioned above, another direction would be completely separating the concept of artifact signing and blob signing. In that case, a new media type of payload for blob signing should be introduced.

Author: > For instance, Alice signs a manifest blob and generates a signature. After Alice publishes the signature, Eve downloads the manifest blob and the signature. Then Eve pushes the manifest blob to a registry along with the signature and a referrer manifest according to the signature. When Bob sees the manifest in the registry pushed by Eve, Bob verifies the manifest against the signature using the flow of so called "OCI verification" where it SHOULD be verified using the flow of blob signing originated by Alice.

I'd like to understand more about the security concern here. From notation point of view, it is verifying that the payload protected by the signature is valid and authentic. Notation does not care whether the payload and the signature are coming from a file system or an FTP server or a registry. As long as the signature is attesting the payload, the verification succeeds. That being said, I question if there is really a need for capturing signer's intent of Blob signing Vs OCI signing. IMO we don't need to differentiate OCI descriptors from Blob descriptors. At the same time, I think we should not mandate OCI descriptors as OCI can evolve over time.

 > In this direction, what we are signing is indeed the "OCI descriptor". Artifacts in registries and blobs are the same concept but stored in different storages.

There is a risk of OCI descriptor evolving over time and can contain fields that may not be applicable for blobs or any artifacts that notation may support in the future. It is already the case with `artifactType` today but it is an optional field. IMO, this quirk is enough to keep these two descriptors separate (at least in the notation specification). Are we 100% sure that there will not be any optional or mandatory fields get added to the OCI descriptor in the future? If yes, I'm okay with using OCI descriptor in the specs. Keep in mind that we can move from separate descriptor definitions to OCI descriptor in the future but not vice versa since that would be a breaking change.

> Similarly, Alice can use an RSA-4096 key to sign an OCI manifest in a registry where the digest is generated by the registry like sha256:xxxx. After signing, Alice can pull down the manifest blob and the signature blob and declare that the signature is generated using blob signing from the signature blob although it is not possible as per this spec since the spec restricts RSA-4096 MUST be paired with sha512:xxx.

You are right. This spec doesn't allow this case. Can you clarify under what valid circumstances, Alice would need to do this? i.e. not use OCI verification workflow but use blob verification? I'm trying to understand if this is an acceptable limitation in Notation, given the benefit of Alice not being able to use a weaker hash algorithm than sha512.

> It is not a concern if they are using notation. For notation-go users, we can provide a utility function to generate a "good" descriptor according to their signing keys.

We can't enforce the users to use this utility function. It will depend on the user to stumble upon the function to realize that they need to use it to be safe. This is a sharp edge. 

> If sha256 is chosen because of the key length of the RSA / EC key, what if we need to replace sha256 (a.k.a sha2-256) with sha3-256 later some day?

This is a good argument. How are we solving this problem for signature digests today?

Reviewer 2: > I'd like to understand more about the security concern here.

When we sign stuffs, we are not just signing the payload but to sign the intention behind it. In other words, when we sign images, we want the verifiers verify them as images and use them as images. The signer is not responsible (typically in the terms of law) if the verifiers use the verified content for other purposes. For example, image publishers won't be responsible if someone pulls down a manifest blob and run it as an executable instead of running as a container. In summary, when there is ambiguity in the payload, the signer will have trouble. That's why signature scheme usually has two field `Content` and `ContentType` for the signing payload.

Related reference:
- https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2021-41190

As I've mentioned above

To eliminate the ambiguity, there are two directions as I've mentioned above:
1. Merge the concepts of artifact signing and blob signing. Since they are the same concept, there will be no ambiguity. That is, their signing / verification workflow are equivalent. In other words, if `sha256:xxx` for RSA-4096 key is allowed in artifact signing, it must also be allowed in blob signing.
2. Completely separate the concepts of artifact signing and blob signing. That is, they will have different signing / verification workflow and different `ContentType` for the signing payload. If a "stuff" is intended to be a blob, it will fail unconditionally as an artifact.

Since currently we are in the middle, it is possible that a signed "stuff" can pass the artifact verification (a.k.a. verification for OCI signing) but fail the blob verification. If the signed "stuff" is intended to be a blob, then there is a security vulnerability.

> There is a risk of OCI descriptor evolving over time and can contain fields that may not be applicable for blobs or any artifacts that notation may support in the future.

We can reference OCI descriptor but restrict the use of new fields or just ignore them.

> Can you clarify under what valid circumstances, Alice would need to do this?

Security is not like coding. Attackers do not need a valid use case or scenario. They will do this because they can, and they will try to exploit this fact for any potential attacks, which we are not aware of.

> We can't enforce the users to use this utility function. It will depend on the user to stumble upon the function to realize that they need to use it to be safe. This is a sharp edge.

For end-users, they should use the `notation` CLI. For developers using `notation-go`, they should follow the docs. For advanced users, no one can enforce them to do anything 😜 

> How are we solving this problem for signature digests today?

It's an open question. For JWS and COSE, I think they will have a new spec. But I want to emphasize that the hash in the descriptor (i.e. in the signing payload) is different with the hash we used in the signature generation by JWS or COSE. Consider $payload = H_c(content)$ and $\sigma = Sign(sk, H_s(payload))$ where $H_c$ is the hash function used in the descriptor and $H_s$ is the hash function used in the signature generation, we are hashing the content twice $H_s(H_c(content))$, which increases the risk of collisions. In other words, `sha256(sha512(content))` has better security than `sha256(sha256(content))`. I haven't done the detailed security analysis but that's the story. Therefore, why do we restrict `H_c` to be `sha256`?

Author: I think we reached a point where we should get on a call to resolve this discussion :)

But let me respond to few points here

> To eliminate the ambiguity, there are two directions as I've mentioned above:

I think these two directions are two extreme sides of the spectrum and there is a middle ground which is what the current spec is proposing.

> Since currently we are in the middle, it is possible that a signed "stuff" can pass the artifact verification (a.k.a. verification for OCI signing) but fail the blob verification. If the signed "stuff" is intended to be a blob, then there is a security vulnerability.

Commands for OCI verification and Blob verification are different. So are the policies. Since it is on the verifier to consume the signed artifact however they wish, they are already providing their intent by picking the right verify command they want. In order for an attacker spoof OCI artifact as a Blob artifact or vise versa, they should already have access to the verification environment, at which point an attacker can do far worse things than exploiting artifact spoofing.

> For end-users, they should use the notation CLI. For developers using notation-go, they should follow the docs.

This goes against the "secure by default" principle.

> We can reference OCI descriptor but restrict the use of new fields or just ignore them.

Isn't it not going to be an OCI descriptor at that point? I'd hate to say "hey this is an OCI descriptor but with these strings attached". We can use OCI descriptor in notation-go all day but specifying it in the specification means, we will have to stick with it even though doesn't make sense for all artifacts notation is going to sign/verify. As I said, this is not a one-way door and we can always call it a OCI descriptor if needed in the specifications. 

> In other words, sha256(sha512(content)) has better security than sha256(sha256(content)). I haven't done the detailed security analysis but that's the story. Therefore, why do we restrict H_c to be sha256?

This is only one side of the coin. I'm sure you would agree that sha512(sha512(content)) has better security than sha512(sha256(content)). With your proposal, a user can shoot herself in the foot by picking sha512(sha256(content)).

Reviewer 3: > In other words, when we sign images, we want the verifiers verify them as images and use them as images. 

I disagree, standalone Notation is simply a signing and verification utility/tool. Notation shouldn't be involved into the business of validating of what is being signed. Once the signature is verified, the verifier can consume the artifact as they see fit. The best we can do is assist the signer by providing tools to convey the intended purpose of the artifact, which can later be used by verifier and we are already doing via the media-type field in the descriptor. Think of it this way: if I am a signer and I signed JSON as JPEG, there's no way for Notation to verify if it's JSON or JPEG.

The issue outlined in https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2021-41190 doesn't apply to our use case. In the CVE, the same system that downloads the content also interprets/parse the content, but in our case, Notation shouldn't interpret the content.

> Consider and where is the hash function used in the descriptor and is the hash function used in the signature generation, we are hashing the content twice , which increases the risk of collisions. 

Is it applicable in all cases or just specific use cases? Can you please direct me to the paper or article that discusses it? Also, we are not restricting h_c to `sha256` we are advocating for defaulting based on key size.

Author: **Summarizing the discussion so far for maintainer voting**

Unlike in OCI, Notation needs to create blob payloads for signing, which includes hashing the blob content using a secure hashing algorithm and then signing it. For OCI images, hash calculation is taken care by OCI registries. In order to generate blob hashes, we have two options to select the hashing algorithm.

**1. Allow the user to pick the hashing algorithm**

Pros:
* Provides most flexibility, users can mix and match algorithms for content hash and signature hash

Cons:
* Users can shoot themselves in the foot by picking a weak algorithm
* Complex deprecation path. Retiring weaker algorithms requires a campaign and users updating their signing workflows

**2. Let Notation pick the algorithm based on signing key strength**

Pros:
* Consistent with how Notation is picking signature hashing algorithms today
* Simpler deprecation path. Retiring weaker hashing algorithm is already taken care by retiring weaker signing keys
* No sharp edges with users picking weaker algorithms unknowingly
* Secure by default
* Simple user experience for blob signing

Cons:
* Less flexibility as in users wont be able to use different hashing algorithm for content hashes 

@shizhMSFT @priteshbandi Please add if I missed anything

Maintainers, please react with below emojis for voting.

Option#1 : ❤️ 
Option#2 : 🚀

Reviewer 2: > I think we reached a point where we should get on a call to resolve this discussion :)

@rgnote Let's have a call 😎 for more efficient communication!

> > For end-users, they should use the notation CLI. For developers using notation-go, they should follow the docs.
>
> This goes against the "secure by default" principle.

It does not against the _secure by default_ principle as `notation-go` can provide some default options.

Reviewer 2: We probably talked about different things.

I'm proposing that we should "Allow the user to pick the hashing algorithm" at the spec level (i.e. this PR). However, we could let `notation` to pick a default algorithm according to the signing key for users for usablilities where `notation` is a reference implementation of this spec.

Reviewer 4: Thanks @priteshbandi @rgnote and @shizhMSFT for such thorough discussions. Here are my two cents:
- This is Notary Project specification, so if we restrict the hash algorithm based on signing key strength, there is no flexibility for any reference implementation. As Pritesh commented, this is only for default alg for Notation, then we should rephase the sentence so that any reference implementation can have their own logic on hash alg. We may consider document the default hash alg in notation spec accordingly. 
- The current text `digest algorithm MUST be deduced from signing certificate's public key.` sounds like it is not a default alg, it is the alg by design. Then during blob verification, if the alg does not meet the key length, the verification should fail. With this in mind, the example that Shiwei commented make sense to me. The definition of signature payload for OCI artifact is the same as the payload for blob, so it is possible that a malicious user puts the blob and signature in the registry, and use OCI verification flow to verify the signature, since OCI workflow will not check whether the hash alg meets the key length, then potentially use less secure alg, for example blob use sha512, and registry uses sha256. There are two ways to solve this: one is the alg is the default, not the determined, so that blob verification will not validate whether alg meets the key len. It is just a default alg that Notation choose. Another way is to define a different payload for blob, so that verifier can differentiate the payload for blob and OCI artifacts, then use the right verification workflow in this example blob verfication to avoid the security advisory.
- To clarify the `OCI descriptor`. I think currently the signature payload uses `OCI descriptor` for reference, but not tightly follow any changes on the `OCI descriptor`, maybe we can just call it `descriptor` used for a payload, which can avoid potential confusion.

Author: Discussed extensively on Feb, 19th community meeting. 

Notes :
1. Keep the specification to enforce hashing algorithm based on public key, both for signing and verification
2. Add to threat model that there are scenarios where the strength of the hashing algorithm for blobs can be lowered by transforming OCI artifacts as blobs
3. As enforcing public key based algorithm selection gives slightly higher security than the otherwise, we are in agreement that that is the right thing to do (however, calling out the corner cases in the threat model).

Author: Issue for tracking updating the threat model : https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/issues/296

>   - `mediaType` can be any arbitrary media type that the user chooses to describe the blob. An example can be `application/octet-stream` 

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
  - `mediaType` can be any arbitrary media type that the user provides to describe the blob. An example can be `application/octet-stream` 
```

  }
}
```

> ##### Blob Payload

Reviewer 4: it would be good to show an example with annotations

  }
}
```
##### Blob Payload

```jsonc
{
  "targetArtifact": {
    "mediaType": "application/octet-stream",
    "digest": "sha256:2f3a23b6373afb134ddcd864be8e037e34a662d090d33ee849471ff73c873345",
    "size": 1024
  }
}
```
##### Blob Payload with annotations

```jsonc
{
  "targetArtifact": {
    "mediaType": "application/octet-stream",
    "digest": "sha256:2f3a23b6373afb134ddcd864be8e037e34a662d090d33ee849471ff73c873345",
    "size": 1024,
    "annotations": {
        "io.wabbit-networks.buildId": "123"  // user defined metadata
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: Since this are similar to OCI, IMO we should remove them and call them just `payload`.

### OCI Signature Discovery

The client should be able to discover all the signatures belonging to an artifact (such as image manifest) by using [OCI Distribution Referrers API][oci-distribution-referrers].
OCI Distribution Referrers API returns a paginated list of all artifacts belonging to a target artifact (such as container images, SBoMs).
The implementation can filter Notary Project signatures by either using OCI Distribution Referrers API or using custom logic on the client.
Each Notary Project signature refers to a signature envelope blob.

### OCI Signature Filtering

An OCI artifact can have multiple signatures, implementations of the Notary Project signature specification uses annotations of the signature manifest to filter relevant signatures based on the applicable trust policy.
The Notary Project signature manifest's `io.cncf.notary.x509chain.thumbprint#S256` annotation key MUST contain the list of SHA-256 fingerprints of certificate and certificate chain used for signing.

## Detached Signatures

> Notary Project supports signing arbitrary blobs and producing detached signatures. These detached signatures can be transferred on any medium that the user prefers and be verified on the verification side. Notary Project detached signature is a self-contained binary file that contains the signature envelope. The file extension of the signature file, which can be either `jws` or `cose`, describes the signature envelope format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Notary Project facilitates the signing of arbitrary blobs, generating detached signatures. These detached signatures can be conveyed via any preferred medium and verified on the receiving end. The Notary Project's detached signature is a self-contained binary file encompassing the signature envelope. The file extension can either be 'jws' or 'cose', indicating the signature envelope format.
```

![Signature storage inside file system](../media/detached-signature-specification.svg)

### Differences between OCI and Detached signatures

> 1. Apart from the `payload` field, all other fields of a signature envelope are identical between OCI and detached signatures.

Reviewer 3: Even payload is identical only media type is changing, which is expected to change depending upon kind of content being signed.

- **Timestamp signature** : An OPTIONAL counter signature which provides [authentic timestamp](#signing-time)e.g. Time Stamp Authority (TSA) generated timestamp signature. Only [RFC3161][ietf-rfc3161] compliant TimeStampToken are currently supported.
- **Signing Agent**: An OPTIONAL claim that provides the identifier of the software (e.g. Notation) that produced the signature on behalf of the user. It is an opaque string set by the software that produces the signature. It's intended primarily for diagnostic and troubleshooting purposes, this attribute is unsigned, the verifier MUST NOT validate formatting, or fail validation based on the content of this claim. The suggested format is one or more tokens of the form `{id}/{version}` containing identifier and version of the software, separated by spaces. E.g. "notation/1.0.0", "notation/1.0.0 myplugin/0.8".

## OCI Signatures

This section describes how a Notary Project signature is stored in an OCI Distribution conformant registry.

> OCI image manifest is used to store signatures in the registry, see [OCI image spec v1.1.0-rc3][oci-image-manifest] for details.

Reviewer 2: [`image-spec v1.1.0`](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/releases/tag/v1.1.0) was just released!

Author: This is out of the scope for this PR. Will create an issue to take care of this separately (I just want to make sure we are doing it thoroughly across all the files and not just this occurrence)

Author: https://github.com/notaryproject/specifications/issues/295

### OCI Signature Discovery

The client should be able to discover all the signatures belonging to an artifact (such as image manifest) by using [OCI Distribution Referrers API][oci-distribution-referrers].
OCI Distribution Referrers API returns a paginated list of all artifacts belonging to a target artifact (such as container images, SBoMs).
The implementation can filter Notary Project signatures by either using OCI Distribution Referrers API or using custom logic on the client.
Each Notary Project signature refers to a signature envelope blob.

### OCI Signature Filtering

An OCI artifact can have multiple signatures, implementations of the Notary Project signature specification uses annotations of the signature manifest to filter relevant signatures based on the applicable trust policy.
The Notary Project signature manifest's `io.cncf.notary.x509chain.thumbprint#S256` annotation key MUST contain the list of SHA-256 fingerprints of certificate and certificate chain used for signing.

> ## Detached Signatures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Blob Signatures
```

> The Notary Project facilitates signing of arbitrary blobs and generating detached signatures. These detached signatures can be conveyed via any preferred medium and verified on the receiving end. The Notary Project's detached signature is a self-contained binary file encompassing the signature envelope. The file extension can either be 'jws' or 'cose', indicating the signature envelope format.

Reviewer: Updated the line `The Notary Project's detached signature is a self-contained binary file encompassing the signature envelope.` imo it's not adding much information.

```suggestion
The Notary Project facilitates signing arbitrary blobs using detached signatures. These detached signatures can be transported via any preferred medium and verified on the receiving end. A detached signature refers to a signature that is not embedded with (and therefore modifies) the original blob, instead it consists of a detached signature envelope with a signature over the unique representation of the blob (blob digest). The Notary Project's detached signature is a signature en. The file extension can either be 'jws' or 'cose', indicating the signature envelope format.
```

![Signature storage inside file system](../media/detached-signature-specification.svg)

### Differences between OCI and Detached signatures

> 1. Apart from the `payload` field, all other fields of a signature envelope are identical between OCI and detached signatures.

Author: `artifactType` is not present for blob payloads. It is only applicable for OCI images. Why do you think we should always differentiate different payloads?

> 1. Apart from the `payload` field, all other fields of a signature envelope are identical between OCI and detached signatures.

Author: @Two-Hearts Can you reply to my comments.

> ### Differences between OCI and Detached signatures

Reviewer 2: We need to define "detached signatures" as detaching signatures means only containing the signature without the payload.

Author: Detached signatures do contain the payload

Reviewer 2: > Detached signatures do contain the payload

My point is that this concept of "detached signatures" confuses people, especially those GPG users.

Without a formal definition, OCI signatures are also detached, aren't they?

Author: Renaming "detached signature" to "blob signature" to avoid confusion.

> ### Differences between OCI and Detached signatures

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Differences between OCI and Blob signatures
```

> 1. Apart from the `payload` field, all other fields of a signature envelope are identical between OCI and blob signatures.

Reviewer 3: Isnt payload a subset of OCI payload?

> 1. Apart from the `payload` field, all other fields of a signature envelope are identical between OCI and detached signatures.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Apart from the `payload` field, all other fields of a signature envelope are identical between OCI and blob signature.
```

> 1. While OCI signatures have signature manifest files, there is no such concept for detached signatures.

Reviewer 3: manifest files are outside signature i.e not part of signature.

> 1. For OCI signatures, the mediaType of the signature envelope (`application/jose+json` or `application/cose`) is present in the signature manifests. For blob signatures, this information is present in signature file extension.

Reviewer 3: nit: we can combine this two points
```suggestion
1. OCI signatures have signature manifest files, containing the mediaType of the signature envelope (application/jose+json or application/cose). However, blob signatures lack such manifest file and this mediaType information is instead found in the signature file extension.
```

> 1. While the format aka `mediaType` of the signature envelope (`application/jose+json` or `application/cose`) is present in the signature manifest file for OCI signatures, detached signatures carry the format information as part of the detached signature file extension i.e. `jws` or `cose`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. The format aka `mediaType` of the signature envelope (`application/jose+json` or `application/cose`) is present in the signature manifest file for OCI signatures, blob signature carry the format information as part of the detached signature file extension i.e. `jws` or `cose`.
```

For OCI signatures, the mediaType of the signature envelope (application/jose+json or application/cose) is present in the signature manifests. For blob signatures, this information is present in signature file extension.

### Algorithm Selection

> The signing certificate's public key algorithm and size MUST be used to determine the signature algorithm. Below are the only supported Signature Algorithms in the Notary project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The signing certificate's public key algorithm and size MUST be used to determine the signature algorithm. Notary Project supports the following Signature Algorithms.
```

Whereas, the Notary Project signatures that contain critical extended attributes will require additional dependencies for signature validation, either on Notation compliant plugins or equivalent tooling which may not be available in all environments.
Similarly, Notation compliant plugin vendors should be aware that usage of extended signed attributes which are marked critical in signature will have implications on portability of the signature.

### Detached Signature Portability

> Notary Project detached signatures provide the maximum portability as there are no requirements on storage or transport medium. Users can can store and transport their blobs and associated detached signatures however they like.

Reviewer: Nit

```suggestion
Notary Project detached signatures provide the maximum portability as there are no requirements on storage or transport medium. Users can can store and transport their blobs and associated detached signatures as required.
```
